TELCODOCS#1254: Using software RAID in LVM Storage (#70625)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/lvms-using-raid-arrays.adoc

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// storage/persistent_storage/persistent_storage_local/persistent-storage-using-lvms.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="lvms-using-raid-arrays_logical-volume-manager-storage"]

> = Integrating software RAID arrays with {lvms}

Reviewer: - For modules, the anchor ID must contain the {context} variable. This is the more important part of my comment and must be fixed before merge. This is because the `{context}` variable is inherited from the assembly, and modules can appear in different assemblies. [source](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/blob/main/contributing_to_docs/doc_guidelines.adoc#module-file-metadata)
- This heading/module title is different from the file name and ID; all three should match as closely as possible. I do understand that the `lvms-` prefix is standing in for an `-lvms` suffix in the file name and ID (we do a similar thing with our `virt-` prefix at times to avoid excessive repetition). However, the module title is now `= Integrating software RAID arrays with {lvms}`, which that diverges enough from the other two that I think it's worth trying to make them all match.

For example:

File name: `modules/lvms-using-raid-arrays.adoc`
ID: `[id="lvms-using-raid-arrays_{context}"]`
Title: `= Using RAID arrays with {lvms}`

or 

File name: `modules/lvms-integrating-software-raid-arrays.adoc`
ID: `[id="lvms-integrating-software-raid-arrays_{context}"]`
Title: `= Integrating software RAID arrays with {lvms}`

Author: Hi @dfitzmau 
We had a discussion on the usage of {context} variable in the IDs. 
Could you PTAL at this suggestion?
Thanks.

Reviewer 2: Oh, sorry for the confusion, @sr1kar99 . I meant:

File name: modules/lvms-integrating-software-raid-arrays.adoc
ID: [id="lvms-integrating-software-raid-arrays_{context}"]
Title: = Integrating software RAID arrays with LVMS

Potentially swap `{lvms}` to  `LVM Storage`.

SOmetimes the customer portal can be funny with attributes in headings (=,==,===)

Was this clearer? Pan is correct about the context variable and its importance for document structuring.

Author: @dfitzmau 
I am sorry for the confusion. I understood it wrong. 
Added {context} variable in the ID, and updated {lvms} to LVM Storage in the heading.
@ousleyp, PTAL!
Thanks.

You can create the Redundant Array of Independent Disks (RAID) array by using the `mdadm` utility, and integrate the RAID array with {lvms}. Logical Volume Manager (LVM) does not support creating a software RAID.

You can integrate the RAID array with {lvms} while creating the `LVMCluster` custom resource (CR).

.Prerequisites

* You created a software RAID during the {product-title} installation.
+
[IMPORTANT]
====
You can only create the RAID array during the installation of {product-title}.
====

* You have installed {lvms}.

.Procedure

. Open the `LVMCluster` CR YAML file.
+
[NOTE]
====
If you have created the `LVMCluster` CR, edit the existing `LVMCluster` CR YAML file.

> ====

Reviewer: This `[NOTE]` is confusing because the step does not imply that the user is creating the file now. It says "Open the `LVMCluster` CR YAML file," which to me implies that it already exists.

Is there a file name/path or a command for opening this CR? If they might not have one yet, can you provide a command for creating a new one, or suggest a file name/location? I would also remove the note in favor of a step that combines both options, if both are valid (like "Create or edit...").

Author: This proc talks about adding a device path to the LVMCluster CR YAML file.
It can be done using the CLI or the web console at the time of creating the file and also after creating the file.

If the device path is added while creating the LVMCluster CR, we have two procs about creating LVMCluster CR using the CLI and web console.

If the device path is added after creating the LVMCluster CR, the user is trying to scale up the storage capacity. We have two procs about scaling up storage using the CLI and web console.

A couple of these modules are in progress. The plan was to add this module in the additional resources section of those relevant modules.

Author: Also, to create the LVMCluster CR, there are two steps:

1 .Create the LVMCluster CR as a YAML "file".
2. Create the LVMCluster CR by running the following command:
    oc create -f <file_name>

So in this case, users can perform the first step (create the YAML fle), and open it to modify as many times as needed before performing the second step.
Because "LVMCluster CR" won't be created until the second step is completed. 
In this case, it makes sense to use "Open the file". This step will also hold true in case if users have already created the "LVMCluster CR" (which means there is an existing LVMCluster CR YAML file).

@ousleyp Please let me know what you think.
Thanks.

Reviewer: Thank you for the explanation! I understand what you mean by "Open..." making the most sense, because it doesn't assume where the user is in the process. I think what you have is good, and what was confusing me about it _is_ the fact that creating the file and creating the object are two different things (as you noted).

Here's a minor clarity suggestion that makes my brain slightly happier. Feel free to take it or leave it :) 

```
. Open the `LVMCluster` CR YAML file.
+
[NOTE]
====
If you already created the `LVMCluster` object, edit the existing `LVMCluster` CR YAML file.
====
```

. Add the path to the RAID array in the `deviceSelector` field of the `LVMCluster` CR YAML file.
+
.Example of RAID array paths in deviceSelector field
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: lvm.topolvm.io/v1alpha1
kind: LVMCluster
metadata:
  name: my-lvmcluster
spec:
  storage:
    deviceClasses:
# ...
      deviceSelector:  <1>
        paths:
        - /dev/md/md-var  <2>
        - /dev/md0  <3>
        optionalPaths:
# ...
----
<1> Contains the paths to the devices that are used to create the LVM volume group. You can specify the device paths in the `paths` field, the `optionalPaths` field, or both. You cannot remove or replace a device after adding it to the LVM volume group.
<2> Example of a path to the RAID array that was created by using the `mdadm` utility. In this example, `md-var` is the RAID array.
<3> In this device path example, `md0` is the RAID array

> . Save the `LVMCluster` CR YAML file.

Reviewer: Does saving the file apply the changes to the cluster? Can you specify what happens at this point?

Author: @jakobmoellerdev 
Could you please confirm if saving the file is enough or running a command to apply the file is required?

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// storage/persistent_storage/persistent_storage_local/persistent-storage-using-lvms.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="lvms-using-raid-arrays_{context}"]

> = Integrating software RAID arrays with {lvms}

Reviewer 2: I'd add some caution here to attributes rendering in a heading on the customer portal. It might work, but hard-coding would be a safer route.

Reviewer 2: It could be OK but one would need to access to PV1 and possibly merge the content before hand to check things out. Best to throw caution to the wind and hardcode for headings.

Reviewer 2: :heavy_check_mark:

Author: Removed the variable and added the attribute value directly in  the ID.

> Logical Volume Manager (LVM) does not support creating a software RAID. However, you can create the RAID array using the `mdadm` utility, and integrate the RAID array with {lvms}.

Reviewer 2: Expand RAID on first occurance (except the title as it can make the title long):

redundant array of independent disks (RAID).

IBM SG :

![Screenshot from 2024-01-31 11-13-40](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/assets/57954076/cee38e65-8b0d-4da0-bcbe-7677277f5ea2)

Safer to spell out first occurence than find if a term is wide nomenclature across industry.

Author: Updated as per the suggestion.

> Logical Volume Manager (LVM) does not support creating a software RAID. However, you can create the RAID array using the `mdadm` utility, and integrate the RAID array with {lvms}.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can create the redundant array of independent disk (RAID) array by using the `mdadm` utility, and integrate the RAID array with {lvms}. Logical Volume Manager (LVM) does not support creating a software RAID. 
```

Flipped the sentences based on potential internet search truncation. Best to start with what a user can do and then mention the limitation.

Author: Updated as per the suggestion.

Reviewer 2: :heavy_check_mark:

You can integrate the RAID array with {lvms} while creating the `LVMCluster` custom resource (CR). 

.Prerequisites

* You created a software RAID during the {product-title} installation.
+

> [NOTE]

Reviewer 2: Switch to an IMPORTANT admonition as the statement is important. See https://redhat-documentation.github.io/supplementary-style-guide/#admonitions

Author: Updated as per the suggestion.

Reviewer 2: :heavy_check_mark:

====
You can only create the RAID array during the installation of {product-title}.
====

* You have installed {lvms}.

.Procedure

> . Open the `LVMCluster` custom resource (CR) YAML file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Open the `LVMCluster` CR YAML file.
```

Author: Updated as per the suggestion.

Reviewer 2: :heavy_check_mark:

+
[NOTE]
====

> If you have created the LVM cluster, then you can edit the existing `LVMCluster` CR.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you have created the LVM cluster, edit the existing `LVMCluster` CR.
```

IBM SG:

![Screenshot from 2024-01-31 11-19-36](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/assets/57954076/f40ae07d-c5e1-43d3-bfff-fcbadefe6af3)

Author: Updated as per the suggestion.

Reviewer 2: :heavy_check_mark:

====

> . Add the path to the RAID array in the `deviceSelector` field in `LVMCluster` CR.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Add the path to the RAID array in the `deviceSelector` field of the `LVMCluster` CR YAML file.
```

Author: Updated as per the suggestion.

+

> .Example of RAID array paths in deviceSelector

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.Example of RAID array paths in deviceSelector section
```

Author: Updated as per the suggestion.

[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: lvm.topolvm.io/v1alpha1
kind: LVMCluster
metadata:
  name: my-lvmcluster
spec:
  storage:
    deviceClasses:
# ...
      deviceSelector:  <1>
        paths:
        - /dev/md/md-var  <2>
        - /dev/md0  <3>
        optionalPaths:
# ...
----

> <1> Contains the paths to the devices used to create the LVM volume group. You can specify the device paths in `paths` field, `optionalPaths` field, or both. You cannot remove or replace a device after adding it to the LVM cluster.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<1> Contains the paths to the devices that are used to create the LVM volume group. You can specify the device paths in the `paths` field, the `optionalPaths` field, or both. You cannot remove or replace a device after adding it to the LVM cluster.
```

Author: Updated as per the suggestion.

Reviewer 2: :heavy_check_mark:

> <2> Example of a path to the RAID array created using `mdadm` utility. In this example, `md-var` is the RAID array.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<2> Example of a path to the RAID array that was created by using the `mdadm` utility. In this example, `md-var` is the RAID array.
```

Author: Updated as per the suggestion.

<3> In this device path example, `md0` is the RAID array

. Save the `LVMCluster` CR YAML file.

[NOTE]
====

> If you do not add the path to the RAID array in the `deviceSelector` field, then {lvms} does not recognize the RAID array created using the `mdadm` utility.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you do not add the path to the RAID array in the `deviceSelector` field, the {lvms} does not recognize the RAID array.
```

I dropped a clause as it repeats previous information.

Author: Updated as per the suggestion.

====

> You can also edit the `LVMCluster` CR using the {product-title} web console.

Author: I have removed this line. This proc talks about adding a device path to the LVMCluster CR YAM file. 
It can be done using the CLI or the web console at the time of creating the file and also after creating the file. 

If the device path is added while creating the LVMCluster CR, we have two procs about creating LVMCluster CR using the CLI and web console.

If the device path is added after creating the LVMCluster CR, the user is trying to scale up the storage capacity. We have two procs about scaling up storage using the CLI and web console.

> You can also edit the `LVMCluster` CR using the {product-title} web console.

Reviewer 2: Thanks, @sr1kar99 . These two procedures are already created or are in progress? If they already exsit, how about adding an additional resources section under the module. Possible even a Next steps heading. Reach out if you want to see any examples.

> You can also edit the `LVMCluster` CR using the {product-title} web console.

Author: A couple of these modules are in progress. The plan was to add this module in the additional resources section of those relevant modules. 
I will complete this action item when those procedures are merged.

> You can also edit the `LVMCluster` CR using the {product-title} web console.

Reviewer 2: Thanks fro confirming.

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// storage/persistent_storage/persistent_storage_local/persistent-storage-using-lvms.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="lvms-using-raid-arrays_{context}"]
= Integrating software RAID arrays with {lvms}

> Logical Volume Manager (LVM) does not support creating a software RAID. However, you can create the RAID arrays using the `mdadm` utility, and integrate the RAID arrays with {lvms}.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Logical Volume Manager (LVM) does not support creating a software RAID. However, you can create the RAID arrays using the `mdadm` utility, and integrate the RAID array device with {lvms}.
```

Reviewer 4: I see that RAID array is used but I'm not sure I understand why if RAID is an array it isn't in backticks.

Author: I referred to the RAID documentation in RHEL, where backticks are not used for RAID. Just followed the same here  as well. Not sure if backticks should be used for RAID.

> Logical Volume Manager (LVM) does not support creating a software RAID. However, you can create the RAID arrays using the `mdadm` utility, and integrate the RAID arrays with {lvms}.

Author: Updated as per the suggestion.

> Logical Volume Manager (LVM) does not support creating a software RAID. However, you can create the RAID arrays using the `mdadm` utility, and integrate the RAID arrays with {lvms}.

Author: Updated as per the suggestion.

You can integrate the RAID arrays with {lvms} while creating the LVM cluster. 

.Prerequisites

* You have created a software RAID during the {product-title} installation.
+
[NOTE]
====

> You can create the RAID arrays only during the installation of {product-title}. For information about creating RAID arrays in {product-title}, see link:https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/openshift_container_platform/4.14/html/installing/installation-configuration#installation-special-config-raid_installing-customizing[Configuring a RAID-enabled data volume]

Author: Updated as per the suggestions.

====

* You have installed {lvms}.

.Procedure

. Open the `LVMCluster` custom resource (CR) YAML file.
+
[NOTE]
====

> If you have created the LVM cluster, then you can edit the existing `LVMCluster` CR. However, it is recommended to integrate the RAID arrays with the {lvms} while creating the LVM cluster.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you have created the LVM cluster, then you can edit the existing `LVMCluster` CR. However, it is recommended to integrate the RAID array device with the {lvms} while creating the LVM cluster.
```

> If you have created the LVM cluster, then you can edit the existing `LVMCluster` CR. However, it is recommended to integrate the RAID arrays with the {lvms} while creating the LVM cluster.

Author: I have removed the recommendation. In the intro, there is a line which says that the users can add raid arrays while creating the LVMCluster CR. I just noticed that as per the doc guidelines, the word "recommend" must be avoided.

====

> . Add the path to the RAID array in the `deviceSelector` section in `LVMCluster` CR.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
. Add the path to the RAID array device in the `deviceSelector` section in `LVMCluster` CR.
```

> . Add the path to the RAID array in the `deviceSelector` section in `LVMCluster` CR.

Author: Updated as per the suggestion

[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: lvm.topolvm.io/v1alpha1
kind: LVMCluster
metadata:
  name: my-lvmcluster
spec:
  storage:
    deviceClasses:
    - name: vg1
      default: true
      deviceSelector: <1>
        paths:
        - /dev/disk/by-path/pci-0000:87:00.0-nvme-1
        - /dev/disk/by-path/pci-0000:88:00.0-nvme-1

>         - /dev/md/md-var <2>

Reviewer 5: we should include an example for an autogenerated md device as well:
`/dev/md0 <2>`

Author: I doubt if we should recommend adding the RAID device at the time of creating the CR. Because editing the CR, though it can be a complex or lengthy process, it is still possible. If the user wants to intentionally skip adding the RAID devices, and decides to add them only when required in the future, in this case editing the CR is the only choice. 

We also have procs like "Scaling up storage of clusters" which are all about editing the existing CRs. In this case it is best to just mention both the possibilities (adding by editing the CR, and adding at the time of creating the CR), and users can choose what works best for them.

What do you think of this approach?

Author: Could you provide a bit more info on the autogenerated RAID array device?
Just to describe the purpose of these devices.

Reviewer 5: > I doubt if we should recommend adding the RAID device at the time of creating the CR. Because editing the CR, though it can be a complex or lengthy process, it is still possible. 

That is true, but configuring a RAID array is something possible only at install time when configuring the nodes. That means that setting up LVMCluster with the mdadm device paths is also a install-time operation and the docs should cover the 90% case.

> If the user wants to intentionally skip adding the RAID devices, and decides to add them only when required in the future, in this case editing the CR is the only choice.

This is correct, but again, speaking from our customers, an edge case.

> We also have procs like "Scaling up storage of clusters" which are all about editing the existing CRs. In this case it is best to just mention both the possibilities (adding by editing the CR, and adding at the time of creating the CR), and users can choose what works best for them.

I agree, because this process is a typical day 2 operation for clusters, unlike configuring a storage device initially on node start.

> What do you think of this approach?

Fine with both as long as they work correctly.

> Could you provide a bit more info on the autogenerated RAID array device?
Just to describe the purpose of these devices.

Sure. If one creates an mdadm device via `mdadm --create /dev/md/<Label>`, then it will show as you also described in the example. However, if you leave this away and just use a device path like `mdadm --create /dev/md0 ...` then the device will not be unter /dev/md/label but directly as /dev/md0 instead. Just a nit, not to worry too much about it

Author: @jakobmoellerdev 
I have added a recommendation as suggested. I've also included a line in the "Creating LVMCluster" proc - in "deviceSelector" field description to indicate that users can add RAID array paths at the time of creating the cluster.

I have added the example for "/dev/md0" but did not use the term "autogenerated" to describe the RAID array as it is a new term and it might need additional description which is not in the scope of this module.

        - /dev/md0 <3>
        optionalPaths:
        forceWipeDevicesAndDestroyAllData: false
      thinPoolConfig:
        name: thin-pool-1
        sizePercent: 90
        overprovisionRatio: 10
----

> <1> Contains the paths to the devices that are used to create the LVM volume group. You can specify the device paths in `paths`, `optionalPaths`, or both. You cannot remove or replace a device after adding it to the LVM cluster.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
<1> Contains the paths to the devices used to create the LVM volume group. You can specify the device paths in `paths` field, `optionalPaths` field, or both. You cannot remove or replace a device after adding it to the LVM cluster.
```

Author: Updated as per the suggestion.

> <2> Example of a path to the RAID array created using `mdadm` utility. In this example, `md-var` is the RAID array.

Reviewer 4: If these values would change the example might be better to change the values to <user_input_values>?

Author: The LVMCluster CR sample contains specific examples of other fields. Hence, added specific device path examples to maintain consistency.

> <3> Example of a path to the RAID array created using `mdadm` utility. In this example, `md0` is the RAID array

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
<3> In this example, `md0` is the RAID array created using `mdadm` utility.
```

Reviewer 4: If you were going to leave it as is I would shorten for minimalism.

Author: Updated as per the suggestion.

. Save the `LVMCluster` CR YAML file.

[NOTE]
====

> If you do not add the path to the RAID array in the `deviceSelector` section, then the {lvms} does not recognize the RAID array created using the `mdadm` utility.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you do not add the path to the RAID array device in the `deviceSelector` section, then the {lvms} does not recognize the RAID array created using the `mdadm` utility.
```

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="lvms-using-raid-arrays_{context}"]
= Using software RAID arrays in {lvms}

// Logical Volume Manager (LVM) does not support creating a software RAID.

// You can create the RAID arrays using the `mdadm` utility. You can also use the RAID arrays that are created using the `mdadm` utility in LVM Storage. 

Logical Volume Manager (LVM) does not support creating a software RAID. However, you can create the RAID arrays using the `mdadm` utility, and use the RAID arrays in the LVM Storage.

.Prerequisites

* You have created a software RAID during the {product-title} installation.
+
[NOTE]
====
You can create the RAID arrays only during the installation of {product-title}. For information about creating RAID arrays in {product-title}, see link:https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/openshift_container_platform/4.14/html/installing/installation-configuration#installation-special-config-raid_installing-customizing[Configuring a RAID-enabled data volume]
====

* You have installed LVM Storage.

.Procedure

. Open the `LVMCluster` custom resource (CR) YAML file.
+
[NOTE]
====

> If you have created the `LVMCluster`, then you can edit the existing `LVMCluster` CR. Else, you can perform this step while creating a new `LVMCluster`.

Reviewer 5: Note that this only works for adding. One cannot replace the LVMCluster Devices

Reviewer 5: Please revise this section as it is hard to edit an existing LVMCluster. We should recommend using a new CR for these setups (during install/setup time. not day2)

====

> . Add the path to the RAID array in the `deviceSelector` section in `LVMCluster` custom resource (CR) YAML.

Reviewer 5: path to the RAID array device

+
.Example LVMCluster CR
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: lvm.topolvm.io/v1alpha1
kind: LVMCluster
metadata:
  name: my-lvmcluster
spec:
  storage:
    deviceClasses:
    - name: vg1
      default: true

>       deviceSelector: <1>

Reviewer 5: This should be an example of a path for a mdadm raid device

Reviewer 5: I suggest removing the other paths for clarity

Author: Updated as per the comment.
